Title: Algorithms for Models with Intractable Normalizing Functions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.17460v1

Published Time: Thu, 19 Mar 2026 00:56:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Chapter 1 

# Algorithms for Models with Intractable Normalizing Functions 

Murali Haran, Bokgyeong Kang, Jaewoo Park 

In this paper we discuss a well known computing problem—inference for models with intractable normalizing functions. Models with intractable normalizing functions arise in a wide variety of areas, for instance network models, models for spatial data on lattices, spatial point processes, flexible models for count data and gene expression, and models for permu-tations (Lu and Boutilier, 2014); for more examples see Matsubara et al. (2022) and Park and Haran (2018). Simulating from these models for fixed parameter values is well studied, starting with work dating back seventy years to the origin of the Metropolis algorithm. On the other hand some of the most practical and theoretically justified algorithms for infer-ence, particularly Bayesian inference, have only been developed within the past two decades. The most computationally efficient algorithms often do not have well developed theory and few if any approaches exist for assessing the quality of approximations based on them. For many problems even the best algorithms can be computationally infeasible. Hence, this is an exciting area of research with many open problems. We explain several key algorithms, providing connections and touching upon practical advantages and disadvantages of each, 1

> arXiv:2603.17460v1 [stat.ME] 18 Mar 2026

2 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

with some discussion of theoretical properties where they impact practice. We discuss an approach for assessing the accuracy of approximations produced by these algorithms; this diagnostic is particularly valuable for algorithm tuning. While our focus is largely on models with intractable normalizing functions, we also discuss algorithms that are more broadly applicable to models where the entire likelihood function is intractable; these methods are of course also applicable to intractable normalizing function problems. Intractable likelihood function problems are growing in importance as statistical models become increasingly sophisticated and data sets become larger and more complex. Inference for intractable likelihood models, also known as likelihood-free inference, therefore represents one of the most important computational challenges of modern statistics. The goals of this manuscript are to (i) provide an accessible introduction to the intractable normalizing function (INF) and intractable likelihood (IL) problems, as well as key ideas underpinning several algorithms used to solve them; (ii) describe an approach for assessing the sample quality of asymptotically inexact algorithms for INF problems; (iii) provide practical recommendations for solving INF problems based on a study of some challenging examples; (iv) suggest avenues for future research. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We provide some historical and technical background for INF and IL problems in Section 1.1. In Section 1.2 we provide a taxonomy for algorithms, along with explanations for several important algorithms, then explain an approach for assessing sample quality for both asymptotically exact and inexact algorithms in Section 1.3. We conclude with the application of several algorithms to challenging examples in Section 1.4, providing insights about the algorithms whenever possible, and then provide a summary and discussion of potential areas for future research in Section 1.5. 

## 1.1 Background 

The landmark Metropolis et al. (1953) paper that introduced the Metropolis algorithm and hence the beginnings of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), describes an algorithm to simulate a spin system in particle physics according to the Ising model (Ising, 1925; Lenz, 1.1. BACKGROUND 31920), which has an intractable normalizing function. Because the problem considered in the paper is simulating from the model for fixed parameters, the normalizing function (really a constant in this case) cancels out in the acceptance ratio of the Metropolis-Hastings algo-rithm. Hence, from the earliest days of MCMC, simulating realizations from a model with intractable normalizing functions has been considered a solved problem. However, inference is an entirely different matter as the normalizing function does not cancel out. We explain below both the ease of simulation from the model and the challenge for inference. Consider a random variable x ∈ X , assumed to be a realization from the probability model f (x | θ) with parameter θ ∈ Θ. Bayesian inference for θ is based on the posterior π(θ |

x) ∝ f (x | θ)p(θ) where p(θ) is a prior density on θ. It is common to have f (x | θ) = h(x |

θ)/c (θ) where c(θ) is an intractable normalizing function of θ. For instance, Ising, Potts, and exponential random graph models (ERGMs) can be expressed as exponential family models of the form f (x | θ) = exp( θS (x)) /c (θ), where θ is a p-dimensional vector of parameters and S(x) is the vector of jointly sufficient statistics for θ. The normalizing function c(θ) = 

∑ 

> x∈χ

exp( θs (x)) is intractable for any realistic problem as it involves summing over all possible x ∈ X . For example for the Ising model which involves 2 potential spins {− 1, 1}

for each of n particles, the number of configurations is 2n, a large number even for relatively small n; for n = 300 it is more than 2 × 10 90 configurations. The posterior distribution for the kinds of models described above is π(θ | x) ∝ h(x |

θ)p(θ)/c (θ). This reveals the source of the challenge with constructing a Metropolis-Hastings sampler for π(θ | x): if the current state of the Markov chain is θt then the proposed state 

θ∗ ∼ q(θt, ·), for some proposal q(·, ·), is accepted with probability 

min 

(

1, p(θ∗)h(θ∗ | x)/c (θ∗)

p(θt)h(θt | x)/c (θt)

q(θ∗, θ t)

q(θt, θ ∗)

)

,

where the intractable normalizing function does not cancel out. In contrast, simulating from the probability model is itself quite straightforward in prin-ciple. That is, for a fixed θ, a Metropolis-Hastings update for sampling from the model 

f (x | θ) is as follows: if the current state of the Markov chain is xt then the proposed state 4 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

x∗ ∼ q(xt, ·) for some proposal q(·, ·) is accepted with probability 

min 

(

1, h(x∗ | θ)/c (θ)

h(xt | θ)/c (θ)

q(x∗, x t)

q(xt, x ∗)

)

= min 

(

1, h(x∗ | θ)

h(xt | θ)

q(x∗, x t)

q(xt, x ∗)

)

,

which does not depend on the intractable normalizing function c(θ). This simple observation allows for easy simulation from the probability model, as first shown in Metropolis et al. (1953). As we will discuss below, simulation from f (y | θ) is key to most algorithms for simulating from π(θ | x). It is important to note that while the normalizing function poses no challenge to simulation, slow mixing is a common issue, inspiring many innovations, notably the Swendsen-Wang algorithm (Swendsen and Wang, 1987) and variants. The earliest approaches, mostly focused on approximating maximum likelihood estima-tors, were based on pseudolikelihood approximations (Besag, 1975, Lindsay, 1988). These likelihood approximations, obtained by taking the product of the full conditional distribu-tions of all variables, are simple and computationally expedient. However, they are limited to certain classes of spatial and network models. They do not apply, for instance, to the Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (Conway, 1961) model or Mallows model (Lu and Boutilier, 2014; Mallows, 1957). In cases where one can apply it, pseudolikelihood is often a poor approx-imation. For example, it can work poorly when the dependence is moderately strong for the Potts model or the autologistic model (cf. Hughes et al., 2011; Okabayashi et al., 2011). In contrast, composite likelihoods, a general scheme for approximation derived by multi-plying a collection of component likelihoods (cf. Varin et al., 2011), are much more flexible by allowing various kinds of marginal and conditional component likelihoods, and can be computationally expedient for many situations (cf. Okabayashi et al., 2011, for an applica-tions to the Potts model). Markov chain Monte Carlo maximum likelihood (MCMCML) is an elegant, theoretically justified approach to approximating MLEs (Geyer and Thompson, 1992b) using importance sampling to approximate the likelihood function as well as the cur-vature of the log likelihood. The challenges with MCMCLE are largely related to finding a good importance function that ensures that Monte Carlo errors do not balloon (see Hummel et al., 2012, for some strategies for ERGMs). Our focus in this chapter is on algorithms for Bayesian inference. We do not discuss max-1.2. ALGORITHMS 5imum likelihood estimation for intractable normalizing function models, nor do we discuss the large number of algorithms focused entirely on approximating normalizing functions or constants themselves (see Gelman and Meng, 1998; Geyer, 2011). 

## 1.2 Algorithms 

Following the categories in Park and Haran (2018) we can broadly classify algorithms for Bayesian inference with intractable normalizing function models into the following overlap-ping categories: (i) auxiliary variable (AV) methods, and (ii) likelihood function approxima-tion (LFA) methods. AV methods typically avoid the evaluation of normalizing functions by introducing a well chosen auxiliary variable into the sampling algorithm. LFA methods con-struct an approximation to the full likelihood function and use the approximation in place of the true likelihood when evaluating the posterior distribution. These approximations can vary widely, from composite likelihood or pseudolikelihood approximations dating back to the 1970s to the use of Gaussian processes or a variety of new machine learning approaches to approximate the likelihood based on samples from f (y | θ) at various θ values. Like-lihood function approximations include many methods that approximate the normalizing function. The categories clearly overlap heavily since most LFA algorithms require drawing samples from the data model f (y | θ), and hence may also be considered AV algorithms. In spite of the overlap, we find the above categorization to be helpful as a way to distinguish the fairly distinct thought processes behind constructing different algorithms for intractable normalizing function problems. The above algorithms may also be categorized as asymptot-ically exact or inexact: for asymptotically exact algorithms the asymptotic distribution of the stochastic process produced by the algorithm—often but not always a Markov chain—is exactly equal to π(θ | y); inexact algorithms do not have this property. We provide an overview of algorithms for Bayesian inference for models with intractable normalizing functions. We sprinkle in discussions of algorithms for models where the en-tirety of the likelihood is intractable because, of course, algorithms for IL also apply to INF problems. Note that there is a vast and fast growing literature on IL methods, often referred 6 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

to as “simulation-based inference”, that spans multiple disciplines; see Cranmer et al. (2020) for an authoritative review. As will become apparent, algorithms for sampling from f (y | θ)

end up being crucial to almost all algorithms developed for INF or IL problems. 

1.2.1 Auxiliary Variable Algorithms 

Here we describe algorithms where an additional simulation is used in various ways to cancel out normalizing function evaluations in the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio. Both the exchange algorithm and double Metropolis-Hastings apply to INF problems. We also de-scribe briefly the MCMC version of the Approximate Bayesian Computation approach. This algorithm is widely applicable to IL problems, entirely eliminating the need for evaluating the likelihood function. 

Exchange Algorithm 

The exchange algorithm (Møller et al., 2006; Murray, 2007) relies on an exact sample from the probability model f (· | θ) to produce a Markov chain with stationary distribution π(θ | x).Let the tth state of the Markov chain with augmented state space be (θt, x t) ∈ Θ × X . In the exchange algorithm, each time a parameter value θ∗ is proposed from q(θt, ·), an auxiliary sample from the probability model at that parameter value θ∗ is drawn, x∗ ∼ f (· | θ∗). The joint proposal (θ∗, x ∗) is then accepted or rejected together to construct a Markov chain on the augmented state space. The Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio for the proposal 

(θ∗, x ∗) is 

α(θt, θ ∗) = min 

{

1, p(θ∗)h(x | θ∗)/c(θ∗)

p(θt)h(x | θt)/HHHc(θt)

q(θ∗, θ t)h(x∗ | θt)/HHHc(θt)

q(θt, θ ∗)h(x∗ | θ∗)/c(θ∗)

}

, (1.2.1) which does not contain normalizing function evaluations. The distribution of the marginal chain, that is, just the θ component of the resulting Markov chain, has stationary distribution 

π(θ | x). This is a very elegant approach to constructing an asymptotically exact sampler for the target posterior. An important requirement for this algorithm is that we have an exact draw x∗ ∼ f (· | θ∗), that is, using a draw from a Markov chain with stationary distribution 1.2. ALGORITHMS 7

f (x | θ∗) does not suffice. For most models of interest, it is either impossible to construct an exact sampler for f (x | θ∗) or, in cases where it is possible, for example using perfect sampling techniques (Propp and Wilson, 1996), it is often computationally too expensive to be of value. In fact, in all the examples we provide in Section 1.4 perfect sampling is not a viable option. 

Double Metropolis-Hastings and Variants 

The Double Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (DMH) (Liang, 2010) simply takes the exchange algorithm and replaces the exact draw from f (· | θ∗) with a draw from a Markov chain with 

f (· | θ∗) as its stationary distribution. The algorithm gets its name from the fact that at each iteration of the Markov chain (“outer chain”) the algorithm requires another Markov chain (“inner chain”) to provide the auxiliary draw. This is obviously expensive, especially if the inner chain is long, but removing the requirement of having an exact draw makes it far more flexible and efficient than the exchange algorithm. There are no theoretical guarantees regarding the quality of DHM samples since the theory for DMH requires both inner and outer chain lengths get large simultaneously, which is impractical. Thus, its efficiency comes at a considerable cost, namely that DMH is asymptotically inexact so standard approaches for assessing convergence (Flegal et al., 2008) do not apply. As we discuss in Section 1.4, DMH is both efficient and relatively easy to construct. Important ingredients for the construction of DMH include coming up with a good proposal for θ (q(θ, ·)), and determining the length of the inner and outer chains. Improving proposals and determining a suitable outer chain length are standard issues in constructing MCMC algorithms but the inner chain length problem is specific to DMH. All three of these issues require the ability to assess the quality of samples produced by DMH; given the fact that the algorithm is asymptotically inexact usual MCMC diagnostics are not useful. This is an issue we will address more broadly in Section 1.3 and we discuss the implementation of DMH in challenging examples in Section 1.4. 8 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

Approximate Bayesian Computation 

Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) is a very widely used class of algorithms for Bayesian inference in the presence of intractable likelihood functions (see Sisson et al., 2018, for a glimpse of the extensive literature in this area). Here we describe ABC-MCMC (Mar-joram et al., 2003), a subset of ABC algorithms. In ABC-MCMC, for current state θt when 

θ∗ is proposed the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio is evaluated only if an auxiliary sample x∗ ∼ f (· | θ∗) is close to the data according to some user-specified distance d(x, x ∗)

and threshold ϵ > 0; of course the distance could be defined on a statistics S(x∗), which is a fruitful area to explore the use of dimension reduction methods. If d(x, x ∗) < ϵ , θ∗ is accepted with probability 

α(θt, θ ∗) = min 

{

1, p(θ∗)

p(θt)

q(θ∗, θ t)

q(θt, θ ∗)

}

, (1.2.2) For discrete data ( X is a discrete space) when ϵ = 0 , Marjoram et al. (2003) use a simple detailed balance argument to prove that the resulting Markov chain converges to stationary distribution π(θ | x). Of course, this is an impractical requirement so the Markov chain with ϵ > 0 is in reality asymptotically inexact. Because of the growing number of problems where the evaluation of f (x | θ) is impossible even while auxiliary simulation from f (· | 

θ) is relatively straightforward, ABC-MCMC and other “likelihood-free” algorithms have become very popular. ABC-MCMC is of course applicable to INF problems but its value in comparison to more specialized INF algorithms like DMH is still an open question. 

1.2.2 Likelihood Approximation Algorithms 

Some of the earliest approaches for inference with intractable normalizing function likeli-hoods involve replacing the entire likelihood function by an approximation that completely avoids computing the normalizing function. This idea remains potentially very useful and opens avenues for research, particularly the use of new machine learning methods for ap-proximation. In the interest of brevity, and because likelihood approximations are major topics in their own right, we provide only brief notes on some of the key ideas in this class 1.2. ALGORITHMS 9of algorithms. 

Composite Likelihood 

In composite likelihood (Lindsay, 1988), the likelihood function L(θ | x) is replaced by an approximation ˆLC (θ | x) obtained by taking the product of a collection of component likelihoods. A maximum composite likelihood estimate (MCLE) is obtained by maximizing 

ˆLC (θ | x) with respect to θ. MCLEs are a good approximation to the MLE in certain settings (cf. Varin et al., 2011). Composite likelihood methods are also easy to implement and com-putationally expedient. In fact, they are the only class of algorithms discussed in this paper that do not require auxiliary simulations. Pseudolikelihood approaches, where the likeli-hood is approximated by a product of full conditional distributions of the random variables in the model, are somewhat limited in their flexibility but composite likelihood methods can be adapted well to particular problems. A nice example is provided in Okabayashi et al. (2011) for the Potts model for discrete spatial lattice data. Here, ˆLC (θ | x) is the product of the joint distributions of multiple pixels given the rest of the lattice. They find that the resulting MCLE is less statistically efficient but much faster and easier to compute than the MLE; the MLE can only be approximated using a combination of MCMC and importance sampling (Geyer and Thompson, 1992a). For Bayesian inference with composite likelihood, 

π(θ | x) is replaced with ˆπ(θ | x) ∝ ˆLC (θ | x)p(θ), as long as ˆπ(θ | x) is proper. Composite likelihood for Bayes is a somewhat under-explored approach, though there are some studies for example for spatial extreme models (Ribatet et al., 2012) and for calibrating complex computer models (Chang et al., 2015). 

Intractable Normalizing Function Approximations 

There is a large literature on approximating the normalizing function using importance sampling, bridge sampling and path sampling methods (Gelman and Meng, 1998). These algorithms can all be used to approximate the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio. For instance, Atchade et al. (2008) construct a stochastic process much like regular MCMC 10 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

except the normalizing function is adaptively approximated at each step of the algorithm by a stochastic approximation using the entire sample path up to that point. In order to make the normalizing function approximation approach efficient, Atchade et al. (2008) propose using an umbrella sampling approach with multiple particles at each iteration (Torrie and Valleau, 1977). 

Pseudo-marginal Algorithms 

In the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio, pseudo-marginal MCMC (Andrieu and Roberts, 2009) replaces an intractable L(θ | x) with its positive and unbiased Monte Carlo approxi-mation ˆL(θ | x). The resulting algorithm is useful for IL problems, and has the advantage of being asymptotically exact. For INF problems, pseudo-marginal MCMC requires an unbiased approximation of 1/c (θ).Although we can easily obtain an unbiased approximation for c(θ), ˆc(θ), using importance sampling, obtaining an unbiased approximation of 1/c (θ) is non-trivial. Note that 1/ˆc(θ)

is a consistent but biased approximation. To address this, Lyne et al. (2015) developed a geometric series correction method, called the Russian roulette algorithm. Under the pseudo-marginal framework, the algorithm is asymptotically exact, and assumptions are satisfied for general forms of h(x | θ). However, implementing the stochastic truncation of the series requires multiple ˆc(θ)s; considering that obtaining each ˆc(θ) requires Monte Carlo samples from f (· | θ), the algorithm is computationally expensive. To speed up the algorithm, one might consider adapting surrogate likelihood approxi-mations. For IL problems, Drovandi et al. (2018) developed an approach to accelerate the pseudo-marginal algorithm by using a Gaussian process approximation of the log of an unbi-ased likelihood approximation. Developing asymptotically exact pseudo-marginal algorithms that are also computationally efficient is very challenging for INF problems. 1.2. ALGORITHMS 11 

Bayesian Synthetic Likelihood 

Bayesian synthetic likelihood (Price et al., 2018) (BSL) is a likelihood-free algorithm that, like ABC, uses simulations from the probability model to modify the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio. For each proposed θ∗, the algorithm generates m simulations x∗

> 1

, . . . , x ∗

> m

from f (· | θ∗), computes a summary statistic based on each simulation, S(x∗

> 1

), . . . , S (x∗

> m

),and then constructs a multivariate normal based on these statistics by simply using the sample mean and sample covariance; this is treated as an approximation to the distribution of the summary statistics. This multivariate normal is then used as a replacement for the true likelihood function in the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio. The idea behind this algorithm is that if the summary statistics are approximately normal, this is a reasonable ap-proximation. The algorithm is asymptotically inexact, like ABC, but it seems to outperform ABC in terms of computational efficiency in some examples (Price et al., 2018), and so may be a useful addition to the toolkit for likelihood-free inference, and hence also intractable normalizing function problems. 

Variational Bayes 

Variational Bayes (VB) (Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006; Jordan et al., 1999) approximates the posterior by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between π(θ | x) and a tractable distribution class, or equivalently maximizing the evidence lower bound. Tran et al. (2017) develop VB for intractable likelihood problems by replacing the likelihood with unbiased importance sampling estimates. For INF problems, Tan and Friel (2020) develop two classes of VB methods for ERGMs with Gaussian posterior approximation. The first approach replaces the intractable likelihood with the adjusted pseudolikelihood (Bouranis et al., 2018) in optimizing the evidence lower bound. These adjustments correct the mode, curvature, and magnitude of the pseudolikelihood based on an affine transformation. The second one is a stochastic gradient ascent approach to optimize the evidence lower bound. Here, the gradient term is approximated through importance sampling estimates. VB approaches are attractive because they are potentially extremely fast, but both VB 12 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

approaches of Tan and Friel (2020) need considerable tuning to be effective for a given distribution. The adjusted pseudolikelihood approach uses MLE and covariance estimates of sufficient statistics for an affine transformation, which requires Monte Carlo simulation from the model. Therefore, the quality of the preliminary iteration of MCMC-MLE (Geyer and Thompson, 1992a; Snijders et al., 2002) is crucial for the success of the algorithm. The stochastic gradient approach also uses the fitted results from the adjusted pseudolikelihood method as inputs for faster convergence; the performance of the algorithm can depend on them. Furthermore, both VB approaches require simulations from the model, for adjusting pseudolikelihood and estimating the gradient respectively. However, if carefully tuned, VB approaches can be computationally faster than other approaches, including DMH, while providing reasonable posterior approximations. For example VB requires fewer auxiliary model simulations than DMH and the simulations can be parallelized. It is important to note that VB methods have so far only been developed for ERGMs (Tan and Friel, 2020); it is unclear how to extend them to other models. 

Surrogate Likelihoods and Simulation-based Inference 

A particularly exciting avenue for both INF and IL methods is exploring new machine learning methods that can be trained on samples to produce a surrogate model and likelihood function. The sampling can be run ahead of time, in parallel, and once the training is done an MCMC algorithm can use the surrogate likelihood. Hence, these algorithms can be very fast, though there are interesting challenges in terms of design—how to select the set of parameters for simulation—and architecture—how to construct the surrogate. For instance, Sainsbury-Dale et al. (2023) develop a neural network approximation to a Bayes estimator in the context of spatial data, and there are recent maximum likelihood approaches for expensive or intractable likelihoods (cf. Sainsbury-Dale et al., 2024; Walchessen et al., 2023). There is a long history of using Gaussian processes in the complex computer models framework, that is, for inference where the model is a complex simulation model with no closed-form expressions (cf. Gramacy, 2020; Santner et al., 2003). Surrogates based on Gaussian processes have been developed for INF problems (cf. Drovandi et al., 2018; Park and Haran, 2020). For instance, in the LikeEm algorithm (Park and Haran, 2020), the normalizing function is 1.3. ASSESSING SAMPLE QUALITY 13 approximated for a set of parameter settings using importance sampling techniques, then a Gaussian process is used to interpolate the approximated likelihood function over the entire parameter space. Once this pre-computing step is completed, the Gaussian process emulator is used instead of the likelihood function in the subsequent MCMC algorithm. This algorithm is fast but asymptotically approximate; it is studied as an example in Section 1.4. The review in Cranmer et al. (2020) is targeted at IL problems rather than INF problems, and contains helpful descriptions of several simulation-based surrogate likelihood methods. We note that the area of simulation-based inference, which broadly includes any approach that uses machine learning methods on model simulations to do inference, is growing rapidly in terms of methods and applications; the methodology in this area is wide-ranging and has gone far beyond just directly approximating likelihoods. 

## 1.3 Assessing Sample Quality 

Assessing the quality of samples from MCMC algorithms has been an active area of research for over three decades, with many theoretically justified and practical approaches (cf. Roy (2020) and relevant chapters in this handbook). However, there are relatively few if any attempts at finding ways to assess the quality of samples produced by asymptotically inexact algorithms. Such diagnostics are important for ensuring the reliability of our results as well as for guidance for tuning our algorithm for any given problem. For example, the double Metropolis-Hastings algorithm requires determining the length of the inner and outer Markov chains; standard MCMC diagnostics are not useful for tuning this algorithm or assessing the quality of samples. Heuristics for tuning are often based on simulated examples and hence can be of limited applicability to a particular problem. Determining which algorithm to prefer is also difficult without a good measure of sample quality, for example the exchange algorithm is asymptotically exact but computationally expensive while the double Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is faster but asymptotically inexact; which should we use for a given problem? There are two measures of sample quality provided by Kang et al. (2024), the approx-imate curvature diagnostic (ACD) and the approximate inverse multiquadric kernel Stein 14 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

discrepancy (AIKS). In the interest of brevity and because we find ACD to be more com-putationally expedient, we focus on ACD here. For more on AIKS and the kernel Stein discrepancy on which it is based, see Kang et al. (2024) and Gorham and Mackey (2017) respectively. 

1.3.1 Curvature Diagnostic 

The curvature diagnostic (Kang et al., 2024) is inspired by maximum likelihood theory. The second Bartlett identity (Bartlett, 1953a,b) can be used to assess whether a model is correctly specified, that is, whether the data we observe are compatible with a particular probability model. The curvature diagnostic considers whether the samples drawn from an algorithm are compatible with the target posterior distribution π(θ | x). Let u(θ) = 

∇θ log π(θ | x), H (θ) = ∂∂θ u(θ), J(θ) = u(θ)u(θ)⊤, and d(θ) = vech [J(θ) + H(θ)] , where vech (M ) denotes the half-vectorization of the matrix M . If the samples from the algorithm are truly from the posterior, then E π{d(θ)} = 0 by Bartlett’s second identity. This leads to the following strategy: for samples {θ(1) , . . . , θ (n)} from the approximate algorithm, estimate the expectation as dn = 1

> n

∑ni=1 d(θ(i)). If the asymptotic distribution of the sample is the target distribution π(θ | x), then √nd nd

→ N(0 , V ) by the central limit theorem (CLT) for independent samples and MCMC CLT for samples from a Markov process. For independent samples, the unbiased and consistent approximation of the covariance matrix V is calculated as Vn = 1

> n

∑ni=1 d(θ(i))d(θ(i))⊤. For samples from a Markov chain, we can estimate V using batch means estimator which is strongly consistent under some conditions (Damerdji, 1994; Jones et al., 2006; Vats et al., 2019). The curvature diagnostic is defined as nd ⊤ 

> n

V −1 

> n

dn. This has an asymptotic χ2(r) distribution, where r = p(p + 1) /2 and p is the dimension of θ, if the asymptotic distribution of the sample is equal to the target posterior. The 1 − α quantile of the χ2(r) can be used as a threshold for this diagnostic. A sample path for which the diagnostic value is below the threshold is considered to have an asymptotic distribution that is reasonably close to the target distribution. 1.4. APPLICATIONS 15 

1.3.2 Approximate Curvature Diagnostic 

In the context of intractable normalizing function problems, H(θ) and J(θ) are intractable and hence need to to be approximated, leading to the approximate curvature diagnostic (ACD). Kang et al. (2024) describes how ACD is computed efficiently, providing theoretical justification for using ACD in place of CD. The ACD is defined as n ˆd⊤ 

> n,N

ˆV −1 

> n,N

ˆdn.,N where ˆdn,N 

and ˆVn,N are the consistent estimates of dn and Vn, respectively. The approximations are obtained using auxiliary samples y(1) , . . . , y(N ) generated exactly from f (· | θ) or generated by a Monte Carlo algorithm having f (· | θ) as its stationary distribution. The self-normalized importance sampling (Tan and Friel, 2020) substantially speeds up the approximation step. Further details on the approximation are found in Kang et al. (2024). In order to control standard errors and computational costs, it is important to construct these approximations carefully. The theoretical justifications may be summarized as follows: if the asymptotic distribution of the sample is equal to the target distribution, then ˆdn,N 

> a.s.

→ dn as N → ∞ 

and ˆVn,N 

> a.s.

→ V as n, N → ∞ , so that the ACD converges to the curvature diagnostic. These results hold under reasonable conditions on the prior and likelihood; for instance they are satisfied for the challenging examples provided later in this chapter. The ACD has been shown to be effective in practice, as demonstrated on multiple challenging examples in Kang et al. (2024). Further details on the application of ACD are in Section 1.4. 

## 1.4 Applications 

We showcase the application of five algorithms — DMH (Liang, 2010), ALR (Atchade et al., 2008), LikeEm (Park and Haran, 2020), VB (Tan and Friel, 2020), and ABC-MCMC (Mar-joram et al., 2003). We study these algorithms in the context of three challenging examples, the Potts model, an exponential random graph model (ERGM), and an Ising network model, though not all the algorithms we consider are applied (or even applicable) to all the examples. The algorithms we have chosen are intentionally quite different from each other to provide readers with a sense of the various pros and cons of different classes of algorithms. The DMH is an auxiliary variable algorithm, while ALR is a function approximation approach 16 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 010 20 30    

> 010 20 30
> x
> y
> Color
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4

Figure 1.1: Multi-color image data simulated from the Potts model with K = 4 and θ =log(1 + √4) .that adaptively approximates the normalizing function at each step of the algorithm using the entire sample path up to that point. LikeEm is a function approximation approach that uses sampling to produce a Gaussian process surrogate to the likelihood. VB is a function approximation approach that uses optimization. ABC-MCMC is a subset of ABC algorithms that evaluates the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance ratio only if an auxiliary sample x∗ from the probability model given the proposed θ∗ is close enough to the data x. We find that all the algorithms we consider have some practical value in certain contexts, though not all the algorithms apply to all the examples we study. We find that our case studies provide insights about the algorithms and also demonstrate the value of the ACD measure of sam-ple quality in tuning the algorithms, assessing whether the approximations are reasonable, and comparing the algorithms to each other. The source code can be downloaded from the following repository ( https://github.com/bokgyeong/HandbookMCMC ). 

1.4.1 Potts Model 

The Potts model (Potts, 1952), a generalization of the Ising model (Ising, 1925; Lenz, 1920), provides an approach for modeling multi-colored images and hence discrete-valued spatial data on a lattice. For an r × s lattice x with discrete values xi ∈ { 1, . . . , K }, the Potts model 1.4. APPLICATIONS 17 with θ > 0 has probability model 

f (x | θ) = 1

c(θ) exp 

{

θ ∑

> i∼j

I(xi = xj )

}

,

where i ∼ j indicates neighboring elements, and I(·) denotes the indicator function. Alarger value for θ produces a higher expected number of neighboring pairs that have the same color. Calculation of the normalizing function c(θ) requires summation over all Krs 

possible outcomes for the model, which is computationally infeasible even for lattices of moderate size. We simulated a 30 × 30 lattice with K = 4 and θ = log(1 + √4) via 100,000 cycles of the Swendsen-Wang algorithm (Swendsen and Wang, 1987) using the R package 

potts (Geyer and Johnson, 2022). The simulated dataset is presented in Figure 1.1. For this example, we consider the DMH, ABC-MCMC, and LikeEm algorithms that are described in Section 1.2. All algorithms are asymptotically inexact. We implement DMH with different numbers m of Swendsen-Wang (inner sampler) updates. For ABC-MCMC, we consider different values ϵ for the threshold. The LikeEm algorithm has two tuning components: the number d of particles and the sample size N for importance sampling estimates. We fix N = 500, which is a relatively large sample size, and study the performance of LikeEM with varying d. The particles are obtained by a short run of DMH with 90 cycles of inner updates. All algorithms were run for 300,000 iterations. We apply ACD to choose suitable values of inner sampler length m for DMH, the threshold ϵ for ABC-MCMC, and particle size d for LikeEm. We used parallel computing to obtain 30 replications of ACD for each sample path. We assess the samples using the empirical mean of the replications. The threshold value of ACD is the 0.99 quantile of χ2(1) , which is 6.63. Figure 1.2 shows the ACD values applied to each sample path. For DMH, ACD has its largest (worst) value at m = 80 and decreases (improves) as m increases. ACD recommends 

m of 100 or more for this example. ABC-MCMC has a trade-off in the choice of ϵ; as it decreases, the approximation becomes more accurate at the expense of a higher rejection rate. ACD indicates that ABC-MCMC provides good sample quality for intermediate threshold values, i.e., ϵ = 12, 13, or 14. For LikeEm, ACD indicates that d should be at least 20 to achieve a desirable approximation accuracy. LikEm with d = 20 is the most computationally 18 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 050 100 

> ACD
> 0100 200 300
> ACD
> 010 20
> ACD

(a) DMH (b) ABC−MCMC (c) LikEm                 

> 80 90 100 200 500
> m
> 511 12 13 14 15 17 50
> ε10 20 30 40 50
> d

Figure 1.2: ACD results for the Potts model example. (a) ACD applied to samples generated from DMH with different numbers m of (inner) Swendsen-Wang updates. (b) ACD applied to samples generated from ABC-MCMC with different values ϵ of the threshold. (c) ACD applied to samples generated from LikeEm with different numbers d of particles. The dashed horizontal line represents the threshold value for the diagnostic. The triangle/square and vertical lines show the empirical mean and 95% uncertainty interval, respectively, of 30 replications of the diagnostic. The red triangle and blue square indicate poor sample quality and good sample quality, respectively. Acciaiuoli Albizzi Barbadori Bischeri Castellani Ginori Guadagni Lamberteschi Medici Pazzi Peruzzi Pucci Ridolfi Salviati Strozzi Tornabuoni 

Figure 1.3: Florentine marriage network (Breiger and Pattison, 1986) consists of 16 vertices and 20 undirected edges. efficient of ACD-selected samples (i.e., DMH with m ≥ 100 , ABC-MCMC with 12 ≤ ϵ ≤ 14 ,and LikEm with d ≥ 20 ), which took only 2.4 minutes. 

1.4.2 An Exponential Random Graph Model 

Exponential random graph models (ERGM) (Hunter et al., 2008; Robins et al., 2007b) have been widely used to study the relationships between network nodes. Consider we have 1.4. APPLICATIONS 19 0100 200 300 400 

> ACD
> 0100 200
> ACD
> 0100 200 300
> ACD

(a) ALR (b) DMH (c) ABC−MCMC            

> 50 100 200 300 400
> d
> 12345
> m
> 11.4 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 23
> ε

Figure 1.4: ACD results for the ERGM example. (a) ACD applied to samples generated from ALR with different numbers d of particles. (b) ACD applied to samples generated from DMH with different numbers m of (inner) Gibbs updates. (c) ACD applied to samples generated from ABC-MCMC with different values ϵ of threshold. The triangle/square and vertical line show the empirical mean and 95% uncertainty interval, respectively, of 30 replications of the diagnostic. The red triangle and blue square indicate poor sample quality and good sample quality, respectively. undirected network data x with n nodes. For all i̸ = j, xi,j = 1 if the ith node and jth node are connected (neighbors), and xi,j = 0 otherwise. Then, the probability model of ERGM is 

f (x | θ) = 1

c(θ) exp {θ1S1(x) + θ2S2(x)} ,S1(x) = 

> n

∑

> i=1

(xi+

1

)

S2(x) = e0.2

> n−2

∑

> k=1

{1 − (1 − e−0.2)k} ESP k(x)

where S1(x) and S2(x) indicate edges and the geometrically weighted edge-wise shared part-nership (GWESP) statistics (Hunter and Handcock, 2006a), respectively. The ESP k(x)

term in the GWESP statistic indicates the number of connected i, j pairs, where i and j

have k common neighbors. Therefore, GWESP can account for higher order transitivities with geometric weights. Evaluation of the normalizing function c(θ) is intractable because it requires summation over all 2n(n−1) possible configurations in the network. We study the Florentine marriage dataset (Breiger and Pattison, 1986), which describes the marriage alliance networks among 16 Florentine families and is shown in Figure 1.3. For this example we consider ALR, DMH, ABC-MCMC and VB algorithms that are 20 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS ALR with d = 200 DMH with m = 3 ABC−MCMC with ε = 1.9 VB                    

> −3.0 −2.5 −2.0 −1.5 −1.0 −3.0 −2.5 −2.0 −1.5 −1.0 −3.0 −2.5 −2.0 −1.5 −1.0 −3.0 −2.5 −2.0 −1.5 −1.0
> −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> θ1
> θ2

Figure 1.5: The estimated joint posterior density of θ1 and θ2 for each algorithm for the ERGM example. described in Section 1.2. Except for ALR, all algorithms are asymptotically inexact. The performance of ALR relies heavily on the set of particles which should cover the important region of the parameter space to provide good posterior samples. We implement ALR with different numbers d of particles. For DMH and ABC-MCMC, we consider different numbers 

m of Gibbs (inner) updates and different values ϵ of threshold, respectively. The algorithms were run for 200,000 iterations. We tune the VB algorithm following Tan and Friel (2020) and obtain an approximate posterior distribution. We generate 100,000 samples independently from the approximate posterior. We apply ACD to each sample path for assessing sample quality. We used parallel computing to obtain 30 replications of ACD for each sample path. We assess the samples using the empirical mean of the replications. The threshold value of ACD is the 0.99 quantile of χ2(3) , which is 11.34. Figure 1.4 shows the ACD values for each posterior sample path. For ALR and DMH, ACD generally decreases (improves) as d and m increase, respectively. ACD recommends 

d of at least 200 for ALR and m = 3 or more for DMH. ACD indicates that ABC-MCMC produces poor sample quality for all threshold values examined in this example. ACD for VB is 956.31 which is much greater than the ACD threshold value of 11.34. This implies that VB does not perform well even though we carefully tune the algorithm. Figure 1.5 shows the estimated joint posterior density for each algorithm with a tuning parameter value chosen by ACD. We observe that ALR and DMH provide similar joint posterior densities. ABC-MCMC seems to mix poorly. VB fails to correctly capture rela-tionship between two parameters. DMH with m = 3 is most computationally efficient of 1.4. APPLICATIONS 21 ACD-selected samples (i.e., ALR with d ≥ 200 and DMH with m ≥ 3), which took only 1.6 minutes. 

1.4.3 An Ising Network Model: Applications to Verbal Aggression Data 

Ising network models (Van Borkulo et al., 2014) are undirected graphical models that can describe interactions among binary responses. Consider binary item response data x with n

responses to p items. For all i, j , xi,j = 1 if the ith respondent answers the jth item correctly (or positively), and xi,j = 0 otherwise. The Ising network model with parameters θ = ( β, γ )

has probability model 

f (x | θ) = 1

c(θ) exp 

{ p

∑

> j=1

βjn∑

> i=1

xij + ∑

> j<k

γjk n∑

> i=1

xij xik 

}

, (1.4.1) where βj is an item easiness parameter, and γjk is a pairwise interaction parameter between item j and k. Calculation of the normalizing function c(θ) requires summation over all 2np 

possible configurations, which is intractable. Furthermore, the model includes p + (p

> 2

) pa-rameters, which are high-dimensional. Here we analyze the item responses to a questionnaire on verbal aggression (De Boeck, 2004). All items are about verbally aggressive reactions in a frustrating situation, and we focus on studying 12 want behavior mode items as follows: (1) A bus fails to stop for me. I would want to curse. (2) A bus fails to stop for me. I would want to scold. (3) A bus fails to stop for me. I would want to shout. (4) I miss a train because a clerk gave me faulty information. I would want to curse. (5) I miss a train because a clerk gave me faulty information. I would want to scold. (6) I miss a train because a clerk gave me faulty information. I would want to shout. (7) The grocery store closes just as I am about to enter. I would want to curse. (8) The grocery store closes just as I am about to enter. I would want to scold. 22 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

(9) The grocery store closes just as I am about to enter. I would want to shout. (10) The operator disconnects me when I had used up my last 10 cents for a call. I would want to curse. (11) The operator disconnects me when I had used up my last 10 cents for a call. I would want to scold. (12) The operator disconnects me when I had used up my last 10 cents for a call. I would want to shout. All responses were dichotomized to have binary values (either 1 = “yes” or 0 = “no”). The data include n = 316 respondents for the p = 12 items described above; the resulting Ising network model has 12 + (12 2

) = 78 parameters. In order to detect significant interactions among items, we apply the spike and slab DMH sampler (Park et al., 2022) that poses spike and slab priors for θ as follows: 

θi | λi, σ 2, ω ind 

∼ λiN (0 , ω 2σ2) + (1 − λi)N (0 , σ 2),λi

> iid

∼ Bernoulli (1 /2) ,

1/σ 2 ∼ Uniform (4 , 100) ,ω ∼ 1 + Y, Y ∼ Gamma (1 , 1/100) ,

(1.4.2) where λi is a latent variable indicating whether θi is included in the model ( λi = 1 ) or not (λi = 0 ), and σ2 and ω control the variances of spike and slab distributions, respectively. Inference for the parameters is carried out by the DMH algorithm. DMH is a practical option for such high-dimensional hierarchical models with intractable normalizing functions. DMH can be implemented in general cases once we have an inner sampler. Other algorithms like VB and LikeEm can be hard to tune or impractical due to the high dimensional parameter space. For DMH, the length m of the inner sampler should be carefully chosen. However, ACD is impractical as it requires approximating the 3,081 × 3,081 covariance matrix of d(θ).To provide a reliable approximation to the covariance matrix, we need long posterior sample paths, resulting in huge demands on memory. Park et al. (2022) study the performance of 1.4. APPLICATIONS 23 12345678910 11 12 

Figure 1.6: An estimated network structure for the verbal aggression data. The width of the lines indicates the strength of the connection between the relevant items; thicker lines indicate stronger interaction between items. the spike and slab DMH sampler with different lengths m of inner sampler. Following the suggestion in Park et al. (2022), we run the algorithm with m = 10 n, where n is the number of respondents. Of the 66 pairwise interaction parameters γjk , the spike and slab DMH shrinks 45 inter-action parameters toward 0 and provides positive values for the others. Figure 1.6 illustrates the resulting estimated network structure. We observe that γ2,5, γ1,4, and γ3,6 have the great-est posterior means, indicating the strongest positive interactions. The strongest positive interaction is observed between items (2) (“A bus fails to stop for me. I would want to scold”) and (5) (“I miss a train because a clerk gave me faulty information. I would want to scold”), which makes sense because both items are about scold behavior. The second strongest positive interaction appears between items (1) (“A bus fails to stop for me. Iwould want to curse”) and (4) (“I miss a train because a clerk gave me faulty information. I would want to curse”); both items are about curse behavior. Lastly, the third strongest positive interaction occurs between items (3) (“A bus fails to stop for me. I would want to shout”) and (6) (“I miss a train because a clerk gave me faulty information. I would want to shout”), indicating that shout behaviors are also strongly connected. This example 24 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

illustrates the shortcomings of the state-of-the-art in computing for INF problems. Although DMH appears to be practical in this context, the closest we have to assurance about the quality of sample-based inference is based on a heuristic that relies on experience. 

## 1.5 Summary 

Inference in the presence of intractable normalizing functions is an exciting computing prob-lem with lots of room for creativity. While it is difficult to provide an exhaustive review, we hope we have provided a reasonably broad perspective on key ideas for this problem. Because of the number of algorithms and the vast difference among them, as well as the scarcity of theory and heuristics for comparing them, it can be difficult to determine which algorithm to apply for any given situation. The recent measures of sample quality in Kang et al. (2024) may be helpful in this regard, as they have some potential for evaluating not only the quality of samples from a particular algorithm but for comparing algorithms from very different categories, including asymptotically exact and inexact algorithms. We find through our study, using the ACD diagnostic (Kang et al., 2024) to measure sample quality where possible, that the double Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is quite effective and broadly applicable when used in tandem with ACD, and also has the advantage of being easier to code than most algorithms for Bayesian inference with intractable normalizing functions. Of course we must add the caveat that our study of algorithms is necessarily limited to a few challenging examples and a small set of interesting algorithms and hence we do not claim that our results will necessarily hold across the enormous spectrum of intractable normalizing function problems. 

Potential Directions for Research 

This chapter has provided a sampling of the many creative ideas that have emerged in recent years for inference with intractable normalizing functions and intractable likelihoods. There are clearly many open practical and theoretical issues. The computational complexity of algorithms for intractable likelihood and intractable normalizing function problems makes 1.5. SUMMARY 25 them computational expensive, and sometimes impractical, for many real applications. Ex-amples of such problems include interaction point process models (cf. Goldstein et al., 2015), network psychometrics (cf. Van Borkulo et al., 2014), exponential random graph models (see Hunter and Handcock, 2006b; Robins et al., 2007a), and mixed graphical models (cf. Cheng et al., 2017; Lauritzen and Wermuth, 1989; Lee and Hastie, 2015) , and mean-parameterized Conway–Maxwell–Poisson models (cf. Huang, 2017; Huang and Kim, 2019; Kang et al., 2025). A major computational bottleneck for most algorithms is the need to generate a large number of expensive auxiliary samples from the probability model. Variational methods offer a promising alternative because the sampling can be parallelized and done in advance; they are potentially very fast but the amount of problem-specific tuning they require to make them work well can make them impractical for many settings; finding ways to make VB work well in these scenarios is an open area for research. While they have been around for a while, composite likelihood methods avoid the need for auxiliary simulation, can be relatively easy to implement, and seem to work well in certain contexts. It may be worth exploring composite likelihood approaches for a variety of INF problems though of course composite likelihood methods are of limited applicability, mostly confined to applications in spatial and network models. Finally, more generalized likelihood approximation approaches show much promise. We show in a real example in Section 1.4 that a Gaussian process-based likelihood approximation can be much more efficient while remaining just as reliable as other algorithms for inference. Approximations based on machine learning techniques have advanced a great deal beyond Gaussian processes (cf. Cranmer et al., 2020, which de-scribes a variety of approximation methods). Hence, the application of fast machine learning techniques to likelihood function approximations is a promising avenue for future research as well, with many interesting challenges to address in terms of theory and applications. An important problem is assessing the quality of approximations obtained from asymp-totically inexact algorithms. The ACD and AIKS methods (Kang et al., 2024) provide a nice way to measure sample quality for asymptotically inexact algorithms, but do not actually provide a way to measure the error in the approximation of particular quantities of interest, typically taking the form of a specific expectation Eπg(X) for a given target π and real-valued function g. As is well known to MCMC users, the requisite length of the chain varies depending on the required accuracy (MCMC standard error) and the specific targeted func-26 CHAPTER 1. NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS 

tion g (Flegal et al., 2008). For instance approximating tail probabilities, g(x) = I(x > c )

for large c and higher moments, g(x) = x2, tend to require more samples than simple expec-tations ( g(x) = x). There are, to our knowledge, no methods for measuring the accuracy of approximations for these different quantities for an asymptotically inexact algorithm when the normalizing function or likelihood function is intractable. The diagnostics we recom-mend can also be computationally demanding, as is apparent from the challenge of applying ACD in the Ising network models example; developing computationally cheaper alternatives will be of value. Another major open problem is measuring the quality of samples produced by inexact algorithms when the entire likelihood function is intractable, for example in ABC and BSL algorithms applied to IL problems, though we found some ABC-specific tools that may be useful (Prangle et al., 2014; Rendsburg et al., 2022). 

## Acknowledgments 

JP was partially supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (2020R1C1C1A0100386814, RS-2023-00217705) and the ICAN (ICT Challenge and Advanced Network of HRD) support program (RS-2023-00259934) supervised by the IITP (Institute for Information & Commu-nications Technology Planning & Evaluation). Bibliography 

Andrieu, C. and Roberts, G. O. (2009). The pseudo-marginal approach for efficient Monte Carlo computations. The Annals of Statistics , 37(2):697 – 725. Atchade, Y., Lartillot, N., and Robert, C. (2008). Bayesian computation for statistical models with intractable normalizing constants. Technical report, University of Michigan, Department of Statistics. Bartlett, M. S. (1953a). Approximate confidence intervals. Biometrika , 40(1/2):12–19. Bartlett, M. S. (1953b). Approximate confidence intervals. II. More than one unknown parameter. Biometrika , 40(3/4):306–317. Bishop, C. M. and Nasrabadi, N. M. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning .Springer. Bouranis, L., Friel, N., and Maire, F. (2018). Bayesian model selection for exponential ran-dom graph models via adjusted pseudolikelihoods. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 27(3):516–528. Breiger, R. L. and Pattison, P. E. (1986). Cumulated social roles: The duality of persons and their algebras. Social networks , 8(3):215–256. Chang, W., Haran, M., Olson, R., and Keller, K. (2015). A composite likelihood approach to computer model calibration with high-dimensional spatial data. Statistica Sinica , pages 243–259. Cheng, J., Li, T., Levina, E., and Zhu, J. (2017). High-dimensional mixed graphical models. 

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 26:367–378. 27 28 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Conway, R. (1961). A queueing model with state dependent service rate. Journal of Industrial Engineering , 12:132. Cranmer, K., Brehmer, J., and Louppe, G. (2020). The frontier of simulation-based inference. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(48):30055–30062. Damerdji, H. (1994). Strong consistency of the variance estimator in steady-state simulation output analysis. Mathematics of Operations Research , 19:494–512. De Boeck, P. (2004). Explanatory item response models: A generalized linear and nonlinear approach . Springer Science & Business Media. Drovandi, C. C., Moores, M. T., and Boys, R. J. (2018). Accelerating pseudo-marginal MCMC using Gaussian processes. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis , 118:1–17. Flegal, J., Haran, M., and Jones, G. (2008). Markov chain Monte Carlo: Can we trust the third significant figure? Statistical Science , 23:250–260. Gelman, A. and Meng, X.-L. (1998). Simulating normalizing constants: From importance sampling to bridge sampling to path sampling. Statistical science , pages 163–185. Geyer, C. and Johnson, L. (2022). potts: Markov Chain Monte Carlo for Potts Models. Geyer, C. J. (2011). Importance sampling, simulated tempering, and umbrella sampling. 

Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo , pages 295–311. Geyer, C. J. and Thompson, E. A. (1992a). Constrained Monte Carlo maximum likelihood for dependent data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) ,54(3):657–683. Geyer, C. J. and Thompson, E. A. (1992b). Constrained Monte Carlo maximum likelihood for dependent data (with discussion). J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. , 54:657–683. Goldstein, J., Haran, M., Simeonov, I., Fricks, J., and Chiaromonte, F. (2015). An attraction–repulsion point process model for respiratory syncytial virus infections. Bio-metrics , 71(2):376–385. Gorham, J. and Mackey, L. (2017). Measuring sample quality with kernels. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1292–1301. PMLR. BIBLIOGRAPHY 29 Gramacy, R. B. (2020). Surrogates: Gaussian process modeling, design, and optimization for the applied sciences . CRC press. Huang, A. (2017). Mean-parametrized Conway–Maxwell–Poisson regression models for dis-persed counts. Statistical Modelling , 17:359–380. Huang, A. and Kim, A. S. (2019). Bayesian Conway–Maxwell–Poisson regression models for overdispersed and underdispersed counts. Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods , 50:3094–3105. Hughes, J., Haran, M., and Caragea, P. C. (2011). Autologistic models for binary data on a lattice. Environmetrics , 22(7):857–871. Hummel, R. M., Hunter, D. R., and Handcock, M. S. (2012). Improving simulation-based algorithms for fitting ergms. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 21(4):920– 939. Hunter, D. R. and Handcock, M. S. (2006a). Inference in curved exponential family models for networks. Journal of computational and graphical statistics , 15(3):565–583. Hunter, D. R. and Handcock, M. S. (2006b). Inference in curved exponential family models for networks. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 15(3):565–583. Hunter, D. R., Handcock, M. S., Butts, C. T., Goodreau, S. M., and Morris, M. (2008). ergm: A package to fit, simulate and diagnose exponential-family models for networks. 

Journal of statistical software , 24(3):nihpa54860. Ising, E. (1925). Beitrag zur theorie des ferromagnetismus. Zeitschrift für Physik A Hadrons and Nuclei , 31(1):253–258. Jones, G. L., Haran, M., Caffo, B. S., and Neath, R. (2006). Fixed-width output analysis for Markov chain Monte Carlo. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 101:1537– 1547. Jordan, M. I., Ghahramani, Z., Jaakkola, T. S., and Saul, L. K. (1999). An introduction to variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning , 37:183–233. 30 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Kang, B., Hughes, J., and Haran, M. (2024). Measuring sample quality in algorithms for intractable normalizing function problems. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,25(286):1–32. Kang, B., Hughes, J., and Haran, M. (2025). Fast bayesian inference for spatial mean-parameterized conway–maxwell–poisson models. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 34(2):697–706. Lauritzen, S. L. and Wermuth, N. (1989). Graphical models for associations between vari-ables, some of which are qualitative and some quantitative. The Annals of Statistics ,17:31–57. Lee, J. D. and Hastie, T. J. (2015). Learning the structure of mixed graphical models. 

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 24:230–253. Lenz, W. (1920). Beitrag zum verständnis der magnetischen erscheinungen in festen körpern. 

Physikalische Zeitschrift , 21:613–615. Liang, F. (2010). A double Metropolis-Hastings sampler for spatial models with intractable normalizing constants. Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation , 80(9):1007– 1022. Lindsay, B. G. (1988). Composite likelihood methods. Contemp. Math. , 80:221–39. Lu, T. and Boutilier, C. (2014). Effective sampling and learning for mallows models with pairwise-preference data. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 15(1):3783–3829. Lyne, A.-M., Girolami, M., Atchadé, Y., Strathmann, H., and Simpson, D. (2015). On Russian Roulette Estimates for Bayesian Inference with Doubly-Intractable Likelihoods. 

Statistical Science , 30(4):443 – 467. Mallows, C. L. (1957). Non-null ranking models. i. Biometrika , 44(1/2):114–130. Marjoram, P., Molitor, J., Plagnol, V., and Tavaré, S. (2003). Markov chain monte carlo without likelihoods. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 100(26):15324– 15328. BIBLIOGRAPHY 31 Matsubara, T., Knoblauch, J., Briol, F.-X., and Oates, C. J. (2022). Robust generalised bayesian inference for intractable likelihoods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 84(3):997–1022. Metropolis, N., Rosenbluth, M., Rosenbluth, A., Teller, A., and Teller, E. (1953). Equations of state calculations by fast computing machines. Chemical Physics , 21:1087–1092. Møller, J., Pettitt, A., Berthelsen, K., and Reeves, R. (2006). An efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo method for distributions with intractable normalising constants. Biometrika ,93(2):451–458. Murray, I. (2007). Advances in Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods . PhD thesis, University of London. Okabayashi, S., Johnson, L., and Geyer, C. J. (2011). Extending pseudo-likelihood for potts models. Statistica Sinica , pages 331–347. Park, J. and Haran, M. (2018). Bayesian inference in the presence of intractable normalizing functions. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 113(523):1372–1390. Park, J. and Haran, M. (2020). A function emulation approach for doubly intractable distributions. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 29(1):66–77. Park, J., Jin, I. H., and Schweinberger, M. (2022). Bayesian model selection for high-dimensional ising models, with applications to educational data. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis , 165:107325. Potts, R. B. (1952). Some generalized order-disorder transformations. In Mathematical proceedings of the cambridge philosophical society , pages 106–109. Prangle, D., Blum, M. G., Popovic, G., and Sisson, S. (2014). Diagnostic tools for ap-proximate bayesian computation using the coverage property. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Statistics , 56(4):309–329. Price, L. F., Drovandi, C. C., Lee, A., and Nott, D. J. (2018). Bayesian synthetic likelihood. 

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 27(1):1–11. Propp, J. G. and Wilson, D. B. (1996). Exact sampling with coupled Markov chains and applications to statistical mechanics. Random Structures and Algorithms , 9(1-2):223–252. 32 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Rendsburg, L., Kristiadi, A., Hennig, P., and Von Luxburg, U. (2022). Discovering in-ductive bias with gibbs priors: A diagnostic tool for approximate bayesian inference. In 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 1503–1526. PMLR. Ribatet, M., Cooley, D., and Davison, A. (2012). Bayesian inference from composite likeli-hoods, with an application to spatial extremes. Stat. Sinica , 22:813–846. Robins, G., Pattison, P., Kalish, Y., and Lusher, D. (2007a). An introduction to exponential random graph (p*) models for social networks. Social Networks , 29(2):173–191. Robins, G., Pattison, P., Kalish, Y., and Lusher, D. (2007b). An introduction to exponential random graph (p*) models for social networks. Social networks , 29(2):173–191. Roy, V. (2020). Convergence diagnostics for markov chain monte carlo. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 7:387–412. Sainsbury-Dale, M., Richards, J., Zammit-Mangion, A., and Huser, R. (2023). Neural bayes estimators for irregular spatial data using graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02600 .Sainsbury-Dale, M., Zammit-Mangion, A., and Huser, R. (2024). Likelihood-free parameter estimation with neural bayes estimators. The American Statistician , 78(1):1–14. Santner, T. J., Williams, B. J., Notz, W. I., and Williams, B. J. (2003). The design and analysis of computer experiments , volume 1. Springer. Sisson, S. A., Fan, Y., and Beaumont, M. (2018). Handbook of approximate Bayesian com-putation . CRC press. Snijders, T. A. et al. (2002). Markov chain Monte Carlo estimation of exponential random graph models. Journal of Social Structure , 3(2):1–40. Swendsen, R. H. and Wang, J.-S. (1987). Nonuniversal critical dynamics in Monte Carlo simulations. Physical review letters , 58(2):86–88. Tan, L. S. and Friel, N. (2020). Bayesian variational inference for exponential random graph models. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 29(4):910–928. BIBLIOGRAPHY 33 Torrie, G. M. and Valleau, J. P. (1977). Nonphysical sampling distributions in Monte Carlo free-energy estimation - umbrella sampling. Journal of Computational Physics , 23:187–199. Tran, M.-N., Nott, D. J., and Kohn, R. (2017). Variational bayes with intractable likelihood. 

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 26(4):873–882. Van Borkulo, C. D., Borsboom, D., Epskamp, S., Blanken, T. F., Boschloo, L., Schoevers, R. A., and Waldorp, L. J. (2014). A new method for constructing networks from binary data. Scientific reports , 4(1):5918. Varin, C., Reid, N., and Firth, D. (2011). An overview of composite likelihood methods. 

Statistica Sinica , pages 5–42. Vats, D., Flegal, J. M., and Jones, G. L. (2019). Multivariate output analysis for Markov chain Monte Carlo. Biometrika , 106:321–337. Walchessen, J., Lenzi, A., and Kuusela, M. (2023). Neural likelihood surfaces for spa-tial processes with computationally intensive or intractable likelihoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04634 .